{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs40 \cf0 From Sattvik kitchen\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0\fs26 \cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Steamed food better than fried food \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Clay pot for baking, simmering, roasting, frying has no leaching of metals \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Drink water stored in copper vessel for {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "x-apple-data-detectors://embedded-result/174"}}{\fldrslt 6-8hrs}} as copper helps in iron absorption, energizes thyroid gland and boosts metabolism \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Dry heat methods (no moisture)of cooking lil bbq, grilling, roasting, baking, frying, saut\'e9ing, broiling, etc produces AGE ( Advanced glycation end products)  - excessive AGE causes diabetes, renal disease, neurodegenerative disease, cardiovascular disease etc \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}How to fight AGE?\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0    - switch to moist heat cooking at low temperatures \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\fs24 \cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\fs26 consume vitamin C ,curcumin \
\ls2\ilvl0
\fs24 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}
\fs26 Moderate exercises \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Buy store veggies for a long time in fridge\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Consume veggies 30 mins after cutting \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Wash and soak veggies before cutting\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t strain soup , drink as is\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t strain the flour before kneading \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Replace corn flour with nuts powder \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Include vegetables while cooking with oil and nuts to reduce fat content \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Leftover food, dough , paneer or pulses in the fridge are not part of saatvik diet  as it increases GI distress \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t reheat food repeatedly as it increases AGE and products dehydrate \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t overcook food as it loses moisture \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t reuse fried oil as it can be carcinogenic \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t use a microwave for cooking or reheating \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t use plastic container for storing hot food as it increases endocrine disruptors \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Reusing plastic box can increase carcinogens \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Non stick pans and old aluminum vessel can make food carcinogenic \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Use measuring spoons while cooking for oil, sugar, salt instead of adding directly \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Capturing steam while cooking veggies is important to preserve moisture and nutrients\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Average salt intake per day should be 6grams only \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Salt should be added at the end and the veggies should be boiled without salt \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Lemon juice should not be added while cooking as heat destroys vitamin C , add just before serving \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t add sugar to fruits , juices or shakes \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Instead of adding cashew paste to gravy , add some watermelon juice to reduce the fat content and make creamy gravy\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Use pumpkin seeds. Sunflower seeds, watermelon seeds, sesame seeds etc to add volume to gravy.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Use blanched tomatoes for gravy \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Coriander with peanuts can be used for gravy \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Steamed spinach can be used for gravy \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Chickpea flour is a great way to add protein and soluble fiber to add volume to gravy \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Beans based curries \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cluster beans - Has folic acid and vitamin C good for pregnant women   Fiber for diabetes , weight loss\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Peanut/groundnut - prevent gallstones, protects against Alzheimer\'92s, folate for pregnant women, magnesium reduces inflammation \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}French beans - Contains folate prevents birth defects , antioxidant, bone health \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Carrots - improves eyesight, prevents constipation, reduces risk of cancer \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Black gram - plant based protein, zinc and potassium Helps digestions , prevents anaemia , improves heart health\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cabbage - best for pitta and kapha dosha. Vitamin c lowers risk of cancer , high water content, high fiber , lowers blood cholesterol. While cooking cabbage , add pinch of cinnamon. Don\'92t cover cabbage initially with lid while steaming as it causes bloating. Check for worms hidden in the leaves while cutting. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Broccoli - reduces cholesterol, lowers BP , reduces risk of cancer. Protects skin and relieves inflammation. Steam cook but do not overcook , add salt while steaming it brightens the color.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Coriander - reduces cholesterol levels and blood sugar. High soluble fiber and reduces urinary infection, rich in vitamin C \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Pointed gourd - carbohydrate, vitamin A and C. Reduces cholesterol levels\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Bengal gram - plant based protein , source of iron, folate , copper , prevents diabetes, saponins (antioxidants)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Turmeric - helps control bad cholesterol or LDL. Good source of minerals. Potassium helps control heart rate and blood pressure \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Bitter gourd - fiber rich , regulates blood sugar level, high in vitamin C and calcium. fights against cancer, boosts immunity\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Mustard oil - Rich in Monounsaturated fatty acid, omega 3 reduces inflammation and lowers BP, omega 6 reduces risk of cancer and heart disease. Eliminates toxins , has vitamin E\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cumin seeds - beneficial for GI , reproductive , nervous and immune systems. Relieves flatulence and acts as metabolic stimulator\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Colocasia - reduces BP , rich in fiber , vitamin C ,B , iron, potassium , phosphorus, magnesium. Cook well , remove thick veins from center of leaf. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Rock salt - improve digestion , mineral bath relieves sore or cramped muscles\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	} Bay leaves - helps with digestive issues, diarrhea , regulates glucose , cholesterol levels \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Potato - gluten free, maintains nerve functioning , bone health, improves blood sugar levels , fights toxins. Wash potato well and steam as a whole\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Pumpkin - rich in vitamin A,C,E, iron, potassium, folate. High water content and has high fiber\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Drumsticks - battles cancer, has high fiber, fights heart disease, decreases digestion related problems , strengthens bone health, boosts immunity, improves kidney and liver health along with vision \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Raw banana - Contains starch and pectin which improves blood sugar control , better digestion , high potassium supports muscle contractions\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Curry leaves - GI health promotion, treats dirrhoea, prevents diabetes, reduce cholesterol, has fiber, rich in iron \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Yam - rich in fiber, potassium, manganese for bone health, growth metabolism and heart functioning \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Ghee- improves digestion, reduces bowel problems , maintains immune system\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Grind coriander seeds to powder fresh to enhance maximum absorption of essential oils \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Over consumption of ghee elevates cholesterol levels \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Brinjal - high in fiber, manganese, potassium. Reduces risk of heart disease, cancer and regulates blood sugar levels. Do not dry roast brinjal as it reduces nutrients present in  it and increases dietary AGE\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cauliflower- Rich in flavonoids and antioxidant and helps in preventing cancer , heart disease and neurodegenerative disease, high fiber \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Mango - low calorie fruit , rich in vitamin A,C, boost immune health, had B6, iron, calcium, zinc, vitamin E , promotes healthy skin and hair. Diabetics should not consume more than one mango . Don\'92t eat them with meals as it increase sugar levels\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Jaggery - rich in iron , folate, prevents anemia, treats menstrual problems , rich in zinc and selenium\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Yoghurt - rich in calcium , probiotic, reduces BP and cholesterol \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Pigeon pea - source of zinc and potassium, stabilizes blood sugar and BP levels , has fiber and prevents constipation.   Soak dal for 3 hours and discard water which may reduce bloating and bring down uric acid levels, consume it in the afternoon \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Dry roast curry leaves on Tawa and add the powder to the recipe \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cut the butter gourd fresh and use it directly, do not rub it with salt as it increases sodium level \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Do not use refined flour, go for multigrain atta \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Do not overcook vegetables \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Add ghee with turmeric \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Heating and grinding spices activates essential oils \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Saut\'e9ing and tempering nuts be done for a short time on medium flame\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Beetroot- Raw beet had low glycemic index than cooked beet . Beet juice helps to reduce BP, improves metabolism and increases stamina \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Dried mango powder can be used instead of chaat masala \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Sorghum flour is gluten free and can be used instead of wheat , low calories as well \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Methi leaves helps in increasing breast milk supply , aids in weight loss \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Oats must be soaked for 10 mins minimum \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t soak raw banana after cutting them \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Do not use refined flour \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t sieve wheat atta , retain the bran \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cook soy granules well to reduce extrogenic  effect ( estrogen hormone regulation)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Water used for soaking dal overnight should be discarded to reduce uric acid levels \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t add baking soda to cook chickpeas \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Use anchor instead of chaat masala for their low salt content\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Adding cardamom to tea helps reduce the requirement of sugar \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cumin must be stored in a cool place so that the essential oils are retained. Heating and grinding spices activate the essential oils\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Sunflower seeds can be ground and added to recipes for creamy texture\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Sabja seeds are an alternative to chia seeds as it reduces inflammation \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Strawberry has cancer fighting properties\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Watermelon has low GI so it can be given to diabetic patients, don\'92t strain the juice \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Adding lemon to green leafy vegetables increase the absorption of iron in the body \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Add lime juice at the end of the cooking , do not heat with lemon juice for a long time. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Fresh ginger is more flavorful than dried ginger \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Add mint towards end of the cooking process , as it loses flavor at high heat \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t rub bitter gourd with salt, it increases sodium level \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Peel cucumber to avoid bitterness\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Organic honey is better\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Do not consume honey in hot foods. Lukewarm is good to retain its properties\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Soaking black raisins and consuming them in the morning reduces constipation. Same for prunes. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Plain walnuts is better than roasted walnuts\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Ripe bananas are better for people with diarrhea \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Melons have high magnesium and acts as sleep inducer \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Tomato-  raw and cooked and blacked contains lycopene and acts as anti cancer agent. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Butter should not be heated at high temp as it has low smoke point and it has saturated fatty acids \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Basil seeds should be soaked well for best effects \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Mustard seeds have anti microbial effect and helps improve immunity, use it on day to day basis \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Boiled moong dal water can be added to dough preparation \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}While steaming cabbage add a pinch of cinnamon. Don\'92t cover cabbage initially as it contains sulfur and may cause bloating. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Store peanuts in a glass jar preferably. Avoid roaring them. Use less oil while cooking with peanuts as they contain good amount of fat\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Sorghum ( Cholam ) is a gluten free replacement to refined flour. Good for those who have IBS. Do not over roast sorghum and barley powder for kanji. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Cardamom is an antidote for both snake and scorpion venom.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Clove essential oil helps with arthritis, blister, boils, burns, sexual dysfunction and morning sickness during pregnancy \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Don\'92t consume too much nutmeg as it can result in irregular heart palpitations and vomiting.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Star anise is an antiviral agent. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Turmeric should be cooked in water or milk, do not add raw turmeric to milk. Black pepper can be added with turmeric for better absorption and fat burning effect. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Rock sugar stalks nose bleeds immediately . Consuming pieces of rock sugar with water will stop the bleeding. \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}Consume pomegranate along with the white rind \
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}While storing apples after cutting, apply some lemon over it to avoid discoloration\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
}